.so REL
.so b-base
.ds iD 5.4 1993/11/09 17:40:15 eggert Exp
.if n .ds - \%--
.if t .ds - \(em
.TH IDENT 1 "\*(Dt" "GNU RCS \*(Rv"
.SH NAME
ident \- identify RCS keyword strings in files
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B ident
[
.B \-q
] [
.B \-V
] [
.I file
\&.\|.\|. ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B ident
searches for all instances of the pattern
.BI $ keyword : "\ text\ " $
in the named files or, if no files are named, the standard input.
.PP
These patterns are normally inserted automatically by the \*r command
.BR co (1),
but can also be inserted manually.
The option
.B \-q
suppresses
the warning given if there are no patterns in a file.
The option
.B \-V
prints \*r's version number.
.PP
.B ident
works on text files as well as object files and dumps.
For example, if the C program in
.B f.c
contains
.IP
.ft 3
#include <stdio.h>
.br
static char const rcsid[] =
.br
  \&"$\&Id: f.c,v \*(iD $\&";
.br
int main() { return printf(\&"%s\en\&", rcsid) == EOF; }
.ft P
.LP
and
.B f.c
is compiled into
.BR f.o ,
then the command
.IP
.B "ident  f.c  f.o"
.LP
will output
.nf
.IP
.ft 3
f.c:
    $\&Id: f.c,v \*(iD $
f.o:
    $\&Id: f.c,v \*(iD $
.ft
.fi
.PP
If a C program defines a string like
.B rcsid
above but does not use it,
.BR lint (1)
may complain, and some C compilers will optimize away the string.
The most reliable solution is to have the program use the
.B rcsid
string, as shown in the example above.
.PP
.B ident
finds all instances of the
.BI $ keyword : "\ text\ " $
pattern, even if
.I keyword
is not actually an \*r-supported keyword.
This gives you information about nonstandard keywords like
.BR $\&XConsortium$ .
.PP
The pattern normally requires a colon and a space immediately
after the keyword and a space immediately before the terminating
.BR $ ,
but for Subversion 1.2 (and later) compatibility,
.B ident
will also recognize the pattern
.BI $ keyword :: "\ text\ " $
(i.e., two colons and a space)
and the pattern
.BI $ keyword :: "\ text\ #" $
(likewise, with a hash before the terminating
.BR $ ).
These are the fixed-width keyword syntax.
To summarize, the three recognized patterns are:
.IP
.BI $ keyword : "\ text\ " $
.br
.BI $ keyword :: "\ text\ " $
.br
.BI $ keyword :: "\ text\ #" $
.br
.SH KEYWORDS
Here is the list of keywords currently maintained by
.BR co (1).
All times are given in Coordinated Universal Time (\*u,
sometimes called \&\s-1GMT\s0) by default, but if the files
were checked out with
.BR co 's
.BI \-z zone
option, times are given with a numeric time zone indication appended.
.TP
.B $\&Author$
The login name of the user who checked in the revision.
.TP
.B $\&Date$
The date and time the revision was checked in.
.TP
.B $\&Header$
A standard header containing the full \*o name, the
revision number, the date and time, the author, the state,
and the locker (if locked).
.TP
.B $\&Id$
Same as
.BR $\&Header$ ,
except that the \*o name is without directory components.
.TP
.B $\&Locker$
The login name of the user who locked the revision (empty if not locked).
.TP
.B $\&Log$
The log message supplied during checkin.
For
.BR ident 's
purposes, this is equivalent to
.BR $\&RCSfile$ .
.TP
.B $\&Name$
The symbolic name used to check out the revision, if any.
.TP
.B $\&RCSfile$
The \*o name without directory components.
.TP
.B $\&Revision$
The revision number assigned to the revision.
.TP
.B $\&Source$
The full \*o name.
.TP
.B $\&State$
The state assigned to the revision with the
.B \-s
option of
.BR rcs (1)
or
.BR ci (1).
.PP
.BR co (1)
represents the following characters in keyword values by escape sequences
to keep keyword strings well-formed.
.LP
.RS
.nf
.ne 6
.ta \w'newline  'u
\f2char	escape sequence\fP
tab	\f3\et\fP
newline	\f3\en\fP
space	\f3\e040
$	\e044
\e	\e\e\fP
.fi
.RE
.ds EY 1990, 1992, 1993
.so b-identification
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR ci (1),
.BR co (1),
.BR rcs (1),
.BR rcsdiff (1),
.BR rcsmerge (1),
.BR rlog (1),
.BR rcsfile (5).
.so b-tichy-cite
.so b-info
