.so REL
.so b-base
.if n .ds - \%--
.if t .ds - \(em
.TH RCSCLEAN 1 "\*(Dt" "GNU RCS \*(Rv"
.SH NAME
rcsclean \- clean up working files
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B rcsclean
.RI [ options "] [ " file " .\|.\|. ]"
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B rcsclean
removes files that are not being worked on.
.B "rcsclean \-u"
also unlocks and removes files that are being worked on
but have not changed.
.PP
For each
.I file
given,
.B rcsclean
compares the working file and a revision in the corresponding
\*o.  If it finds a difference, it does nothing.
Otherwise, it first unlocks the revision if the
.B \-u
option is given,
and then removes the working file
unless the working file is writable and the revision is locked.
It logs its actions by outputting the corresponding
.B "rcs \-u"
and
.B "rm \-f"
commands on the standard output.
.PP
Files are paired as explained in
.BR ci (1).
If no
.I file
is given, all working files in the current directory are cleaned.
Filenames matching an \*r suffix denote \*os;
all others denote working files.
.PP
The number of the revision to which the working file is compared
may be attached to any of the options
.BR \-n ,
.BR \-q ,
.BR \-r ,
or
.BR \-u .
If no revision number is specified, then if the
.B \-u
option is given and the caller has one revision locked,
.B rcsclean
uses that revision; otherwise
.B rcsclean
uses the latest revision on the default branch, normally the root.
.PP
.B rcsclean
is useful for
.B clean
targets in makefiles.
See also
.BR rcsdiff (1),
which prints out the differences,
and
.BR ci (1),
which
normally reverts to the previous revision
if a file was not changed.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BI \-k subst
Use
.I subst
style keyword substitution when retrieving the revision for comparison.
See
.BR co (1)
for details.
.TP
.BR \-n [\f2rev\fP]
Do not actually remove any files or unlock any revisions.
Using this option will tell you what
.B rcsclean
would do without actually doing it.
.TP
.BR \-q [\f2rev\fP]
Do not log the actions taken on standard output.
.TP
.BR \-r [\f2rev\fP]
This option has no effect other than specifying the revision for comparison.
.TP
.B \-T
Preserve the modification time on the \*o
even if the \*o changes because a lock is removed.
This option can suppress extensive recompilation caused by a
.BR make (1)
dependency of some other copy of the working file on the \*o.
Use this option with care; it can suppress recompilation even when it is needed,
i.e. when the lock removal
would mean a change to keyword strings in the other working file.
.TP
.BR \-u [\f2rev\fP]
Unlock the revision if it is locked and no difference is found.
.TP
.BI \-V
Print \*r's version number.
.TP
.BI \-V n
Emulate \*r version
.IR n .
See
.BR co (1)
for details.
.TP
.BI \-x "suffixes"
Use
.I suffixes
to characterize \*os.
See
.BR ci (1)
for details.
.TP
.BI \-z zone
Use
.I zone
as the time zone for keyword substitution;
see
.BR co (1)
for details.
.SH EXAMPLES
.LP
.RS
.ft 3
rcsclean  *.c  *.h
.ft
.RE
.LP
removes all working files ending in
.B .c
or
.B .h
that were not changed
since their checkout.
.LP
.RS
.ft 3
rcsclean
.ft
.RE
.LP
removes all working files in the current directory
that were not changed since their checkout.
.SH FILES
.B rcsclean
accesses files much as
.BR ci (1)
does.
.so b-environment
.SH DIAGNOSTICS
The exit status is zero if and only if all operations were successful.
Missing working files and \*os are silently ignored.
.ds EY 1990, 1991, 1992, 1993
.so b-identification
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR ci (1),
.BR co (1),
.BR ident (1),
.BR rcs (1),
.BR rcsdiff (1),
.BR rcsmerge (1),
.BR rlog (1),
.BR rcsfile (5).
.so b-tichy-cite
.so b-info
.SH BUGS
At least one
.I file
must be given in older Unix versions that
do not provide the needed directory scanning operations.
.br
