.ds Rv 5.10.0
.ds Dt 2020-10-20
.ds i \&\s-1ISO\s0
.ds r \&\s-1RCS\s0
.ds u \&\s-1UTC\s0
.ds o \*r file
.TH RCSFREEZE 1 "\*(Dt" "GNU RCS \*(Rv"
.SH NAME
rcsfreeze \- freeze a configuration of sources checked in under RCS
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B rcsfreeze
.RI [ "name" ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B rcsfreeze
assigns a symbolic revision
number to a set of \*os that form a valid configuration.
.PP
The idea is to run
.B rcsfreeze
each time a new version is checked
in.  A unique symbolic name (\c
.BI C_ number,
where
.I number
is increased each time
.B rcsfreeze
is run) is then assigned to the most
recent revision of each \*o of the main trunk.
.PP
An optional
.I name
argument to
.B rcsfreeze
gives a symbolic name to the configuration.
The unique identifier is still generated
and is listed in the log file but it will not appear as
part of the symbolic revision name in the actual \*os.
.PP
A log message is requested from the user for future reference.
.PP
The shell script works only on all \*os at one time.
All changed files must be checked in already.
Run
.IR rcsclean (1)
first and see whether any sources remain in the current directory.
.SH FILES
.TP
.B RCS/.rcsfreeze.ver
version number
.TP
.B RCS/.rcsfreeze.log
log messages, most recent first
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B \s-1RCSINIT\s0
Options prepended to the argument list, separated by spaces.
A backslash escapes spaces within an option.
The
.B \s-1RCSINIT\s0
options are prepended to the argument lists of most \*r commands.
Useful
.B \s-1RCSINIT\s0
options include
.BR \-q ,
.BR \-V ,
.BR \-x ,
and
.BR \-z .
.TP
.B \s-1RCS_MEM_LIMIT\s0
Normally, for speed, commands either memory map or copy into memory
the \*o if its size is less than the
.IR memory-limit ,
currently defaulting to ``unlimited''.
Otherwise (or if the initially-tried speedy ways fail),
the commands fall back to using
standard i/o routines.
You can adjust the memory limit by setting
.B \s-1RCS_MEM_LIMIT\s0
to a numeric value
.IR lim
(measured in kilobytes).
An empty value is silently ignored.
As a side effect, specifying
.B \s-1RCS_MEM_LIMIT\s0
inhibits fall-back to slower routines.
.TP
.B \s-1TMPDIR\s0
Name of the temporary directory.
If not set, the environment variables
.B \s-1TMP\s0
and
.B \s-1TEMP\s0
are inspected instead and the first value found is taken;
if none of them are set,
a host-dependent default is used, typically
.BR /tmp .
.SH AUTHOR
Stephan v. Bechtolsheim
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR co (1),
.BR rcs (1),
.BR rcsclean (1),
.BR rlog (1).
.PP
Walter F. Tichy,
\*r\*-A System for Version Control,
.I "Software\*-Practice & Experience"
.BR 15 ,
7 (July 1985), 637-654.
.PP
The full documentation for \*r is maintained as a Texinfo manual.
If the
.BR info (1)
and \*r programs are properly installed at your site, the command
.IP
.B info rcs
.PP
should give you access to the complete manual.
Additionally, the \*r homepage:
.IP
.B http://www.gnu.org/software/rcs/
.PP
has news and links to the latest release, development site, etc.
.SH BUGS
.B rcsfreeze
does not check whether any sources are checked out and modified.
.PP
Although both working and \*r file names are accepted,
they are not paired as usual with RCS commands.
.PP
Error checking is rudimentary.
.PP
.B rcsfreeze
is just an optional example shell script, and should not be taken too seriously.
See \s-1CVS\s0 for a more complete solution.
